# Cluster-Analysis-of-Multidimensional-Movement-Data-from-the-Slider®

**Paper Title**: Cluster Analysis of Multidimensional Movement Data from the Slider® Home Physiotherapy Device: Insights into Kinetic Patterns

This is the R codes/script used for the study's data analysis.

# NB: The executable R script (dubbed `Main R codes_ExecutableFile.r`) is attached 

# Abstract:
Recent advances in rehabilitation sciences have increasingly leveraged computational methods to enhance diagnostic and therapeutic strategies. This study presents a comprehensive clustering analysis of movement data captured using a novel home exercise device, the “Slider®” which measures kinetic variables such as force, laser-measured distance, and optical tracker coordinates from participants' lower limbs during home-based physical rehabilitation exercises. Clustering participant movement patterns aims to derive clinically relevant insights that can inform personalized rehabilitation protocols. Such analysis identifies distinct clusters based on similarity or dissimilarity measures, representing different movement behaviours that may help predict individual recovery trajectories and potential post-operative complications. This study emphasises the critical role of biomechanical data analysis in clinical decision-making within rehabilitation contexts. For the first time, this study independently analyzed high-dimensional time-dependent bi-lateral knee kinematics and force datasets obtained from the Slider® from 32 participants using four different unsupervised clustering methods: K-means, Hierarchical clustering, PAM (Partition Around Medoids), and CLARA (Clustering Large Applications). Three distinct movement patterns or clusters were optimally identified for each knee. The relative performance of the clustering methods was assessed and compared using silhouette analysis. Hierarchical clustering was found to be the most effective for the right knee kinetic datasets, while CLARA proved to be the best-performing method for the left knee datasets, respectively. These clusters correlate with the mechanical and rotational dynamics of lower limb exercises. Significant determinants of the time-varying cluster membership, including demographic characteristics (such as gender, BMI, and age) and pain levels, were identified for both knees. These clinically relevant kinetic patterns may facilitate the development of more individualised rehabilitation protocols, enhancing patient outcomes.
